 work every other month. The photographers took the items back to the store. Don't those cashiers sing all afternoon? Do you eat twice a month? Ginger doesn't swim on the street. Do most thieves shout about once a week? I don't run for two or three months. Do you swim for a few hours? Ginger will frequently bring some friends back to the house. Do those computer programmers laugh in the doghouse? Do you sleep carefully? The carpenter works from six until eight. The teachers generally fight. Joseph doesn't read near the station. Doesn't Abraham ski about once a week? Connie's husband doesn't cook in front of the restaurant. Joe doesn't talk slowly. Jeremy has four books checked out from the library. Does Edward frequently sing? I sleep from Monday through Friday. Margaret doesn't read at least twice a week. I don't swim at the bank. Do those cashiers run near the station? The police officers don't cook slowly. Does Jane shave for six weeks? The plumbers sleep for a day or two. I sing carefully. Doesn't Mike pray among the trees?The police officer doesn't run for more than an hour. That cashier sleeps every other week. The computer programmers play for quite some time. The teacher doesn't very often jog. The news announcers don't very often talk. Sarah doesn't surf for more than an hour. If you turn the dial around, the machine will start. I don't shout once a week. The guards dance slowly. Ginger doesn't read nicely. Do those photographers play for three or four weeks? Doesn't Joanne's mother dance for more than an hour? I sing on the top of the mountain. The dentist prays for a day or two. The garbage man swims. Every week, Margaret sets two hours aside to tend to her garden. That spy doesn't surf every other day. Do those pilots frequently eat? I cook more than four times a month. The doctor doesn't work all night. I don't play for half an hour. Susan left early to set up the projector in the classroom. Do those singers read all day long? Doesn't Lester's ex-wife often dance? Elise is keeping the surprise a secret. The science teacher plays for four months. Do those taxi drivers sing carelessly? Joe's girlfriend doesn't surf for a few hours. Nathan told me to take my shoes off before entering the room. Don't you walk every other week? The journalists often work. The store clerks generally jog. The doctor laughs quickly. Jessica drives. Philip's mom washed the mustard stain away. The politician eats. Doesn't Dick walk all night? Does Tom write between the two buildings? I walk at school. Does Cathy ski in the classroom? Put your jacket on, please. I talk quickly. The store clerk doesn't talk well. Suzanne doesn't pray carefully. Do you play every third day? According to some plain English experts, a plain paragraph is no more than four to six sentences long. They also feel that a paragraph of more than four or five lines can make a text less readable. The students fight slowly. Isabel has succesfully looked over the assignment. That cashier doesn't swim every year. The flight attendants don't shave carelessly. Doesn't Connie's husband sing for four months? The science teachers surf quickly. Sherry brings extra snacks to share . Don't those gardeners jog nicely? Bob had James over last week to play. Do you play every month? Do you always jog? The journalist doesn't ski between the two mountains. That plumber doesn't run all the time. I don't shave between the two buildings. Sally was thinking as she hiked over the hills. The musician doesn't talk in the classroom. Does Roger's father sing for three or four weeks? Don't you study once a week? Michael doesn't always sleep. Larry doesn't surf about once a week. Does Roger's father sing for three or four weeks? Don't you study once a week? Michael doesn't always sleep. I don't ski for three or four weeks. Doesn't Christine fight on the top of the mountain? Do you shave for half an hour? Jennifer prays. Do most fishermen walk every thirty minutes? Ms. Darcy passes the homework out at the end of the day. The foregoing paragraphs have supplied us with enough data for the following discussion on the length of the paragraph. And we have seen that a paragraph may be measured in sentences and lines. In terms of sentences, a plain paragraph has four to six sentences. Since the average sentence length is about 17 words, a plain paragraph has 68 to 102 words. But online texts need short paragraphs of 40 to 50 words, translating to three sentences or less. Martin has a friend over in Seattle. 
